---
layout: post
author: Jareau Wade
title: "How are you submitting 1099s to the IRS this year?"
tags:
- balanced
- payments
- IRS
- 1099s
- tax forms
---

Many online marketplaces are responsible for submitting 1099-misc 
forms to the IRS for any sub-vendors that makes more than $600 a year
on their platform.

As a payment processor, [Balanced](http://balancedpayments.com) is responsible for reporting 1099-K forms to the IRS for merchants selling goods or services on our marketplace partners' platforms, but only when those merchants make more than $20,000 from 200+ transactions in a year.

#### [Requirements for reporting 1099-misc](http://www.irs.gov/instructions/i1099msc/ar02.html#d0e931):

- What is nonemployee compensation?   If the following four conditions are met, you must generally report a payment as nonemployee compensation.
- You made the payment to someone who is not your employee;
- You made the payment for services in the course of your trade or business (including government agencies and nonprofit organizations);
- You made the payment to an individual, partnership, estate, or, in some cases, a corporation; and
- You made payments to the payee of at least $600 during  the year.

#### [Requirements for reporting 1099-K](http://www.irs.gov/Businesses/New-1099-K-Reporting-Requirements-for-Payment-Settlement-Entities):

Beginning in January, 2012, payment settlement entities (PSEs) are required by the Housing Assistance Tax Act of 2008 to report on Form 1099-K for the following transactions.

Payments in settlement of third party network transactions IF:

- Gross payments to a participating payee exceed $20,000; AND
- There are more than 200 transactions with the participating payee.


#### What this means for Balanced customers:

Balanced, not the marketplace, is responsible for submitting tax forms to the IRS for all transactions that 
we process. For example, if a merchat on Gittip makes $601 this year from transactions processed via Balanced, neither
Gittip nor Balanced will need to submit anything to the IRS. If the merchant makes $20,001 from 200 transactions,
Balanced will submit a 1099-K to the IRS and the merchant. Marketplaces processing their merchants' transactions through
Balanced will never need to submit 1099s.

**EDIT**: Added the last section to clarify some common questions I was receiving.
